>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 11:
HUNDREDS OF UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS ARRESTED BY FEDERAL
AGENTS IN RAIDS IN SIX STATES
NOW FACING DEPORTATION; AND IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
CORPORATIONS LOOKING TO RELOCATE
AND THE COMPETITION AMONG STATES
TO OFFER THE BEST FINANCIAL
INCENTIVES.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
A SURGE IN IMMIGRATION RAIDS
ORDERED BY THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION HAS LED TO THE
DETENTION AND LIKELY DEPORTATION
OF HUNDREDS OF IMMIGRANTS ACROSS
THE UNITED STATES.
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY TELLS THE NEWSHOUR
DURING THE PAST FIVE DAYS THERE
WERE "TARGETED ENFORCEMENT
OPERATIONS" AGAINST CRIMINALS
AND UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS FROM
A DOZEN LATIN AMERICAN
COUNTRIES.
WITHOUT RELEASING TOTAL ARREST
NUMBERS, D.H.S. SAYS THE
OPERATIONS HAVE OCCURRED IN
CALIFORNIA, ILLINOIS, NEW YORK,
NORTH CAROLINA, SOUTH CAROLINA
AND GEORGIA.
IMMIGRATION RIGHTS ADVOCATES SAY
THERE WAS ALSO INCREASED
ACTIVITY BY IMMIGRATION AND
CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT, OR ICE, IN
KANSAS, OKLAHOMA, TEXAS,
FLORIDA, VIRGINIA AND MARYLAND.
ONE GROUP CRITICIZED ICE FOR NOT
BEING FORTHRIGHT WITH ADVOCATES
AND THEIR ATTORNEYS ABOUT THE
ACTIONS.
A DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY SPOKESWOMAN TELLS THE
NEWSHOUR:
THE HEAD OF THE ICE FIELD OFFICE
IN LOS ANGELES SAYS HIS AGENTS
ARRESTED 160 FOREIGN NATIONALS.
ALMOST ALL OF THEM HAD FELONY OR
MISDEMEANOR CONVICTIONS, AND
ABOUT 40 HAVE ALREADY BEEN
DEPORTED.
THE STEPPED-UP ACTION STEMS FROM
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S JANUARY 25th
EXECUTIVE ORDER TO DETAIN
IMMIGRANTS WHO'VE BROKEN THE LAW
AND EXPEDITE THEIR REMOVAL.
HOMELAND SECURITY SECRETARY JOHN
KELLY ACCOMPANIED ICE AGENTS IN
SAN DIEGO YESTERDAY.
>> WENT TO A HOUSE, KNOCKED ON
THE DOOR AND TOOK A PARTICULARLY
BAD INDIVIDUAL, A MALE, INTO
CUSTODY.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR SOME
PERSPECTIVE ON THE IMMIGRATION
RAIDS, I AM JOINED FROM MIAMI BY
"U.S.A. TODAY" IMMIGRATION
REPORTER ALAN GOMEZ.
THE IMMIGRATION COMMUNITY CALLS
THEM RAIDS.
ICE WANTS TO CALL THEM PLANNED
ENFORCEMENTS.
WAS THIS SOMETHING ALREADY
PLANNED, OR WAS THIS A RESULT OF
TRUMP EXECUTIVE ORDERS?
>> EVERYTHING ICE IS SAYING
RIGHT NOW IS THAT THIS WAS
ABSOLUTELY A ROUTINE OPERATION
THAT THEY HAD ACTUALLY STARTED
PLANNING BEFORE PRESIDENT TRUMP
SIGNED HIS EXECUTIVE ORDER ON
JANUARY 25 THAT REALLY WAS
DESIGNED TO RAMP UP
DEPORTATIONS.
I CAN TELL YOU THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION DID TWO OR THREE
OF THESE A YEAR.
AROUND THIS TIME LAST YEAR, THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION LED A RAID
AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN THAT
WERE COMING FROM CENTRAL
AMERICA.
IT WAS A VERY CONTROVERSIAL
OPERATION AT THE TIME.
BUT IT KIND OF SHOWS THAT THIS
IS PART OF THEIR PRACTICE.
THEY DO THIS TWO OR THREE TIMES
A YEAR.
AND ACCORDING TO ICE THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT HAS BEEN WEEKS IN
THE PLANNING AND HAD NOTHING TO
DO AND WAS NOT COMING FROM ANY
DIFFERENT ORDERS FROM THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE A
WIDER NET CAST BECAUSE OF WHAT
PRESIDENT TRUMP IS INTERESTED
IN?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
WHEN WE HEAR THAT FEAR, WHEN WE
HEAR THAT PANIC FROM THE
IMMIGRANT COMMUNITY, THIS IS
KIND OF WHAT THEY WERE WAITING
FOR.
UNDER PRESIDENT OBAMA, HE SET
FORTH ENFORCEMENT PRIORITIES; IN
OTHER WORDS, PEOPLE THAT THEY
WERE GOING TO TARGET FOR
DEPORTATION.
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS WITH
CRIMINAL RECORDS, WITH GANG TIES
WHO POSE A THREAT TO
NATIONAL SECURITY, AND THOSE WHO
HAD RECENTLY CROSSED THE BORDER.
WHAT PRESIDENT TRUMP DID WHEN HE
SIGNED HIS EXECUTIVE ORDER ON
JANUARY 25 WAS VASTLY EXPAND
THAT POOL.
SO NOW IT'S PEOPLE WITH ANY KIND
OF CRIMINAL RECORD, PEOPLE WHO
HAVE BEEN CHARGED WITH CRIMES
THAT WOULD BE DEEMED DEPORTABLE,
PEOPLE WHO COMMITTED PUBLIC
WELFARE FRAUD, PEOPLE WHO HAVE
MADE FALSE REPRESENTATIONS TO
THE GOVERNMENT-- IN OTHER WORDS,
PEOPLE WHO USE A FAKE SOCIAL
SECURITY NUMBER TO GET A JOB.
AND SO WHEN YOU START ADDING ALL
THAT UP, I MEAN, I'VE SEEN
ESTIMATES THAT THIS-- THAT EIGHT
MILLION TO NINE MILLION
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS ARE
CONSIDERED PRIORITIES BY THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION.
SO, YES, IT'S A VERY, VERY BIG
POOL OF PEOPLE THAT THEY'RE
GOING AFTER.
>> Sreenivasan: AND IT'S
IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT PRESIDENT
OBAMA, WHO LEFT OFFICE WITH THE
TITLE "DEPORTER IN CHIEF," I
MEAN THIS IS A FAIRLY WELL-OILED
DEPORTATION MACHINE THAT'S
ALREADY ON THE BOOKS.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
EARLY IN HIS ADMINISTRATION, HE
MADE THE POINT VERY CLEAR THAT
HE WAS GOING TO ENFORCE
IMMIGRATION.
AT THE TIME, HE WAS DOING THAT
TO SORT OF CONVINCE REPUBLICANS
IN CONGRESS TO GO ALONG WITH
HIM ON AN IMMIGRATION REFORM
PACKAGE.
BUT IT DIDN'T WORK FOR HIM IN
EITHER DIRECTION.
HE WAS BASHED BY REPUBLICANS AND
BY... SAYING THAT HE DIDN'T DO
ENOUGH ON IMMIGRATION
ENFORCEMENT.
HE WAS BASHED BY IMMIGRATION
ADVOCATES WHO SAID THAT HE WAS
DOING TOO MUCH.
AND AS YOU MENTIONED, THEY
LABELED HIM THE "DEPORTER IN
CHIEF."
IN REALITY WHAT HAPPENED WAS HE
DID-- FOR A TIME HE WAS SETTING
YEARLY RECORDS FOR THE NUMBER OF
PEOPLE WHO WERE DEPORTED FROM
THE COUNTRY, AT ONE POINT
REACHING 400,000 PEOPLE.
BUT IN THE LAST FEW YEARS,
THOSE NUMBERS REALLY PLUMMETED.
NOW THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION IS
TRYING TO BRING THAT BACK UP.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS IS ALSO
WHERE THE BULK OF ENFORCEMENT
SPENDING GOES.
I READ THAT BASICALLY WE SPEND
MORE ON DEPORTATIONS AND ICE
ENFORCEMENT THAN ON THE F.B.I.,
THE A.T.F., THE SECRET SERVICE
ALL COMBINED.
>> I THINK THAT DEALS WITH THE
TOTAL AMOUNT OF MONEY THAT WE
DEDICATE TO BORDER PATROL AND TO
ICE.
UNDERSTAND, ONLY A SMALL
FRACTION OF PEOPLE WHO WORK FOR
ICE-- THERE ARE ABOUT 15,000
AGENTS THAT WORK AT ICE-- AND
ONLY ABOUT 7%-8% OF THEM ARE
ACTUALLY ON THESE ENFORCEMENT
REMOVAL TASK FORCE THAT GO OUT
AND SEEK PEOPLE LIVING IN THE
COUNTRY.
BUT YEAH, IT'S AN INCREDIBLY
LARGE APPARATUS, BUT IT'S
ONE THAT PRESIDENT TRUMP,
WITHOUT ANY HELP FROM CONGRESS,
CAN INCREASE DRAMATICALLY.
HE CAN RETASK A LOT OF PEOPLE
WHO WORK FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT, HE CAN
REFOCUS ALL THOSE FOLKS ON GOING
INTO THE COUNTRY AND SEEKING
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS.
SO EVEN THOUGH THE APPARATUS
ALREADY IS LARGE, IT CAN
ABSOLUTELY BE INCREASED
DRAMATICALLY VERY QUICKLY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALAN GOMEZ
FROM "U.S.A. TODAY" JOINING US
FROM MIAMI, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THE FEDERAL
ELECTION COMMISSION IS ASKING
PRESIDENT TRUMP TO IMMEDIATELY
SHARE ANY EVIDENCE OF VOTER
FRAUD IN NEW HAMPSHIRE SO HIS
LATEST ALLEGATIONS OF VOTING
IMPROPRIETIES MAY BE
INVESTIGATED.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS AND
"POLITICO" REPORT THAT IN A
CLOSED-DOOR MEETING WITH TEN
REPUBLICAN SENATORS ON THURSDAY
AND WITHOUT OFFERING ANY
EVIDENCE, MR. TRUMP ALLEGED
BUSLOADS OF VOTERS FROM
MASSACHUSETTS CAST BALLOTS
AGAINST HIM IN NEW HAMPSHIRE,
FORCING HIM TO NARROWLY LOSE THE
STATE TO HILLARY CLINTON LAST
NOVEMBER.
"POLITICO" SAYS HIS REMARKS WERE
MET WITH "AN UNCOMFORTABLE
SILENCE."
PREVIOUSLY, AND ALSO WITHOUT ANY
EVIDENCE, THE PRESIDENT CLAIMED
HE LOST THE NATIONAL POPULAR
VOTE TO CLINTON BECAUSE THREE
MILLION TO FIVE MILLION PEOPLE
MAY HAVE VOTED FOR HER
ILLEGALLY.
RETAIL GIANTS SEARS AND K-MART
SAID TODAY THEY'VE REMOVED 31
ITEMS FROM THE "TRUMP HOME"
COLLECTION OF FURNITURE,
LIGHTING AND OTHER PRODUCTS THEY
SOLD ONLINE.
A SPOKESPERSON SAYS THE STORES
FOCUS ON THEIR "MOST PROFITABLE
ITEMS."
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL"
REPORTED TODAY THAT SALES OF
IVANKA TRUMP'S CLOTHING LINE
CARRIED BY DEPARTMENT STORE
CHAIN NORDSTROM DROPPED 32% LAST
YEAR.
HER FATHER, PRESIDENT TRUMP,
TWEETED ON WEDNESDAY THAT THE
STORE'S DECISION TO DROP
IVANKA'S LINE WAS "UNFAIR."
THE NEXT DAY, DURING A
TELEVISION INTERVIEW, WHITE
HOUSE COUNSELOR KELLYANNE CONWAY
EXPLICITLY URGED AMERICANS TO
BUY IVANKA'S PRODUCTS.
THAT'S CAUSED A HOUSE OVERSIGHT
COMMITTEE TO ASK THE OFFICE OF
GOVERNMENT ETHICS TO REVIEW
WHETHER CONWAY VIOLATED RULES
BARRING FEDERAL EMPLOYEES FROM
ENDORSING PRODUCTS.
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY'S PLAN TO
DEFUND PLANNED PARENTHOOD GOT A
SHOW OF SUPPORT TODAY FROM
HUNDREDS OF ANTI-ABORTION
PROTESTS ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
BUT THOSE PROTESTS WERE OFTEN
SMALLER THAN SIMULTANEOUS
DEMONSTRATIONS BY ABORTION
RIGHTS SUPPORTERS AT THE SAME
SITES.
DOZENS OF ANTI-ABORTION
DEMONSTRATORS MARCHED TO A
PLANNED PARENTHOOD LOCATION IN
THE NATION'S CAPITAL.
IN ST. PAUL, MINNESOTA, THE
"STAR TRIBUNE" REPORTS 5,000
ABORTION RIGHTS DEMONSTRATORS
WERE SEPARATED BY POLICE
BARRIERS FROM 500 ANTI-ABORTION
ACTIVISTS.
ANTI-ABORTION GROUPS, SAYING THE
ELECTION OF PRESIDENT TRUMP HAS
ENERGIZED THEM, HAD CALLED FOR
PROTESTS OUTSIDE 200 PLANNED
PARENTHOOD CLINICS IN 45
STATES.
IN DETROIT, SOME 300 ACTIVISTS
TURNED UP OUTSIDE A PLANNED
PARENTHOOD SITE, MOST OF THEM IN
SUPPORT OF THE GROUP.
PLANNED PARENTHOOD, WHICH TURNED
100 LAST YEAR, SAYS ONLY 3% OF
ITS SERVICES ARE FOR ABORTIONS,
AND MOST OF ITS FEDERAL FUNDING
IS FROM MEDICAID REIMBURSEMENTS
FOR PREVENTIVE CARE.
THE NEWSHOUR ASKED VIEWERS IF
THEY WERE AFFECTED BY PRESIDENT
TRUMP'S EXECUTIVE ORDER ON
IMMIGRATION.
READ THE STORY, INCLUDING SOME
OF YOUR RESPONSES, AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
THIS MONTH, TWO MAJOR COMPANIES
ANNOUNCED THEY'RE MOVING THEIR
HEADQUARTERS WITHIN THE UNITED
STATES.
SWISS FOOD AND DRINK
CONGLOMERATE NESTLE IS MOVING
ITS U.S. BASE FROM SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA TO NORTHERN VIRGINIA,
AFFECTING 1,200 JOBS; WHILE
CATERPILLAR, THE GIANT
CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT-
MAKING COMPANY, IS MOVING ITS
LONGTIME HEADQUARTERS FROM
PEORIA, ILLINOIS, TO CHICAGO.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
A LOOK AT HOW THESE RELOCATIONS
HIGHLIGHT THE TUG OF WAR BETWEEN
CITIES AND STATES FOR TOP
COMPANIES AND JOBS.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: FOR MORE THAN 40
YEARS, THESE TWO BUILDINGS
TUCKED AWAY IN THE LEAFY ENCLAVE
OF FAIRFIELD, CONNECTICUT,
HOUSED THE HEADQUARTERS OF ONE
OF THE LARGEST MANUFACTURERS IN
THE UNITED STATES: GENERAL
ELECTRIC.
BUT A YEAR AGO, G.E. ANNOUNCED
IT WAS MOVING TO BOSTON AND
TAKING 200 HIGH-PAYING JOBS WITH
IT.
MIKE TETREAU IS FAIRFIELD'S
FIRST SELECTMAN, THE TOWN'S TOP
ELECTED OFFICIAL.
>> YOU'VE GOT ONE SIDE SAYING
THAT, "NAH, THEY WERE PLANNING
IT ALL ALONG.
THERE'S NOTHING WE CAN DO."
ON THE OTHER SIDE, YOU HAVE
PEOPLE SAYING, "NO, YOU'RE TO
BLAME.
IT'S A BAD TAX ENVIRONMENT.
WE FORCED THEM OUT OF
CONNECTICUT."
>> Reporter: G.E. WAS ONE OF
FAIRFIELD'S TOP TAXPAYERS,
PAYING $1.6 MILLION IN PROPERTY
TAXES IN FISCAL YEAR 2016.
G.E. STILL HAS MORE THAN 4,000
WORKERS IN OTHER CONNECTICUT
FACILITIES, INCLUDING 600 RE-
ASSIGNED FROM HEADQUARTERS, BUT
THE DEPARTURE IS A BLOW FOR A
STATE ALREADY STRUGGLING WITH
TREMENDOUS FISCAL LIABILITIES.
CATHERINE SMITH IS COMMISSIONER
OF THE CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF
ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT.
>> THE REALITY IS THE 200 JOBS
THAT ARE MOVING FROM CONNECTICUT
TO BOSTON REALLY AREN'T GOING TO
MAKE OR BREAK THE ECONOMY HERE
IN CONNECTICUT.
BUT I WOULD SAY THAT THE
SYMBOLISM, THE PERCEPTION THAT
CHANGED WITH THE G.E. DECISION
IS CERTAINLY A CHALLENGE FOR THE
STATE AND SOMETHING THAT WE'VE
BEEN WRESTLING WITH A BIT.
>> Reporter: CONNECTICUT IS
WRESTLING WITH CONTRADICTORY
ECONOMIC FORCES.
IT'S HOME TO 13 BILLIONAIRES AND
THE STATE HAS THE HIGHEST PER
CAPITA INCOME IN THE COUNTRY.
BUT IT ALSO HAS THE HIGHEST PER
CAPITA DEBT; THE STATE IS
$23 BILLION IN THE RED, AND ITS
PENSION FUND FOR TEACHERS AND
STATE WORKERS IS ONE OF THE
COUNTRY'S MOST UNDERFUNDED.
IN 2014, GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY
ECONOMISTS RANKED CONNECTICUT
DEAD LAST OF THE 50 STATES IN
FISCAL HEALTH.
>> A LOT OF NOT-SO-GOOD CHOICES
IN FRONT OF US, BUT WE HAVE TO
MAKE THE HARD CHOICES.
>> Reporter: IN THE PAST TWO
YEARS, CONNECTICUT GOVERNOR DAN
MALLOY AND THE STATE LEGISLATURE
HAVE CHOSEN TO MAKE DEEP CUTS IN
EDUCATION AND CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS AND LAID OFF MORE THAN
1,000 STATE EMPLOYEES.
THE STATE HAS ALSO RAISED ITS
PERSONAL INCOME TAX AND ADDED A
SURCHARGE THAT EFFECTIVELY
RAISED THE 7.5% CORPORATE TAX
RATE TO 9% FOR THE STATE'S
LARGEST COMPANIES, ONE OF THE
HIGHEST RATES IN THE U.S.
IN A JUNE 2015 EMAIL TO THE
STAFF, G.E. C.E.O. JEFF IMMELT
HAD COMPLAINED ABOUT CONNECTICUT
RAISING ITS TAXES "FIVE TIMES
SINCE 2011."
IMMELT TOLD EMPLOYEES THE
COMPANY HAD FORMED "AN
EXPLORATORY TEAM TO LOOK INTO
THE COMPANY'S OPTIONS TO
RELOCATE CORPORATE H.Q. TO
ANOTHER STATE WITH A MORE PRO-
BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT."
MASSACHUSETTS OFFERED G.E. $145
MILLION IN INCENTIVES TO MOVE,
INCLUDING PURCHASING THESE TWO
WAREHOUSES AS G.E. WORKSPACE,
GRANTING UP TO $25 MILLION IN
PROPERTY TAX RELIEF FROM THE
CITY OF BOSTON, AND POSSIBLY
IMPROVING LOCAL ROAD AND PARKING
INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> IT WAS A PRETTY GOOD DEAL FOR
G.E., BUT IT WAS ALSO A PRETTY
GOOD DEAL FOR THE STATE AND FOR
THE CITY.
>> Reporter: MASSACHUSETTS
GOVERNOR CHARLIE BAKER HELPED
NEGOTIATE THE DEAL.
>> WHEN WE HEARD THEY WERE
LOOKING FOR POSSIBLY RELOCATING
THEIR HEADQUARTERS, I THINK WE
SIMPLY FELT THAT WITH THE
ECOSYSTEM WE HAD HERE AND WITH
THE COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES WE
HAD HERE, IT WOULD BE A MISTAKE
FOR US NOT TO AT LEAST GIVE IT A
TRY AND SEE WHAT HAPPENED.
>> Reporter: HOW CLOSELY DOES
MASSACHUSETTS MONITOR THE FISCAL
PLAYING FIELDS OF OTHER STATES
AND PARTICULARLY STATES THAT ARE
HOME TO FORTUNE 500 COMPANIES?
>> WELL, WE'RE IN A
COMPETITION-- AND WE KNOW THAT--
WITH LOTS OF OTHER FOLKS.
I MEAN, WE'VE HAD GOVERNORS COME
UP TO MASSACHUSETTS TO MAKE A
PITCH TO COMPANIES HERE ABOUT
WHY THEY SHOULD BE IN THEIR
STATES.
>> Reporter: BAKER, A
REPUBLICAN, COOPERATED WITH
BOSTON'S DEMOCRATIC MAYOR, MARTY
WALSH, ON THE PITCH TO G.E.
THE TWO MEN HAD CEMENTED THEIR
RELATIONSHIP DURING THE RECORD
BREAKING WINTER OF 2015, WHEN
STORMS DUMPED OVER NINE FEET OF
SNOW IN BOSTON.
>> THE G.E. PEOPLE ACTUALLY SAID
TO US AT ONE POINT THAT ONE OF
THE THINGS THAT REALLY IMPRESSED
THEM ABOUT THE BID FROM BOSTON
WAS THE FACT THAT THERE REALLY
WASN'T AN INCH OF DAYLIGHT
BETWEEN THE CITY AND THE STATE
ON ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: THE COMPANY ALSO
SAYS MOVING ITS HEADQUARTERS IS
PART OF A STRATEGIC
TRANSFORMATION INTO A "DIGITAL
INDUSTRIAL COMPANY," PRODUCING
THE ANALYTICAL TECHNOLOGY
REQUIRED IN LARGE INDUSTRIAL
PRODUCTS LIKE ITS OWN AIRCRAFT
ENGINES, TRAIN LOCOMOTIVES AND
GAS TURBINES.
G.E. VICE PRESIDENT ANN KLEE,
WHO OVERSAW THE NEGOTIATIONS
BEHIND THE MASSACHUSETTS MOVE,
SAYS THE BOSTON REGION OFFERS A
STEADY STREAM OF THE TALENT THE
COMPANY NEEDS TO MAKE THE
TRANSFORMATION IT SAYS IT
REQUIRES.
>> AND THAT JUST WASN'T
CONNECTICUT, A PLACE THAT'S WHAT
WE CALL "IN THE FLOW OF IDEAS."
AND THAT'S IN A CITY WHERE YOU
HAVE A GREAT, YOU KNOW, ENERGY,
ACCESS TO TALENT, AN ABILITY TO
ATTRACT AND RETAIN TALENT.
PEOPLE WANT TO MOVE INTO CITIES.
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE SEEING WITH
MILLENNIALS.
AND SO, WE LOOKED AT THE MOVE
FROM THAT PERSPECTIVE.
HOW WOULD WE GET INTO AN
ECOSYSTEM OF INNOVATION?
WHICH IS WHAT WE FOUND IN
BOSTON.
>> Reporter: THE NEW G.E.
HEADQUARTERS, INCLUDING THIS 12-
STORY OFFICE TOWER, WILL TAKE UP
ABOUT 100,000 SQUARE FEET LESS
THAN THE SPACE OF THE OLD
CONNECTICUT BUILDINGS.
>> WE THINK ABOUT THE TALENT
WE'RE BRINGING IN.
LOTS OF CODERS, SOFTWARE
DEVELOPERS, TECHNOLOGISTS.
SO, WHEN WE THINK ABOUT OUR NEW
HEADQUARTERS, THIS IS NOT YOUR
GRANDMOTHER'S HEADQUARTERS.
>> I THINK THAT JEFF IMMELT
REALIZES THAT THERE IS A
DIFFERENT MINDSET.
>> Reporter: "BOSTON GLOBE"
BUSINESS REPORTER JON CHESTO HAS
WRITTEN ABOUT THE DEAL.
>> HE TALKS ABOUT IT A LOT,
ABOUT, "I DON'T WANT TO SIT IN
AN OFFICE WHERE I CAN LOOK OUT
THE WINDOW AND SEE DEER RUNNING
BY."
HE SAYS, "I WANT TO WALK OUT THE
OFFICE AND GET," YEAH, I THINK
HE USED THE EXPRESSION, WAS
"PUNCHED IN THE FACE BY SOME
M.I.T. GEEK WHO CAN DO MY JOB
BETTER THAN ME."
AND THERE'S A LOT OF SMART
PEOPLE WITHIN A THREE-MILE
RADIUS OF WHERE... WHERE THEIR
HEADQUARTERS IS NOW.
>> Reporter: G.E. HAS NOW JOINED
A ROSTER OF LARGE COMPANIES
LEVERAGING BETTER DEALS FOR
THEMSELVES FROM STATES.
FOOD PROCESSING GIANT CONAGRA,
THE MAKER OF CHEF BOYARDEE AND
SLIM JIM, MOVED ITS HEADQUARTERS
FROM OMAHA, NEBRASKA, TO CHICAGO
WITH A COLLECTION OF UNDISCLOSED
TAX INCENTIVES FROM ILLINOIS.
NEWELL BRANDS, WHICH MAKES
SHARPIE PENS AND RUBBERMAID
PRODUCTS, MOVED FROM ATLANTA,
GEORGIA, TO HOBOKEN, NEW JERSEY,
WITH A $27 MILLION TAX INCENTIVE
PACKAGE.
HOTEL CHAIN MARRIOTT STAYED PUT
IN MARYLAND AFTER IT WAS
PROMISED A $62 MILLION
INCENTIVE PACKAGE.
>> COMPETITION BETWEEN THE
STATES OVERALL IS EXTREMELY
HIGH.
COMPANIES THAT HAVE THEIR
PRESENCE HERE IN THE STATE GET
CALLS FROM NORTH CAROLINA, SOUTH
CAROLINA, TEXAS, SO WE HAVE
GOVERNORS THAT COME INTO THE
STATE TO TRY TO RECRUIT
COMPANIES AWAY.
SO, IT'S INCREDIBLE INTENSIVE.
MY OWN PERSONAL VIEW-- AND I
THINK OUR GOVERNOR, AS WELL-- IS
THAT IT'S NOT NECESSARILY
BENEFICIAL FOR US TO BE USING
STATE TAX DOLLARS, WHICH IS WHAT
WE DO FOR THESE FINANCIAL
INCENTIVE PROGRAMS THAT ARE
OFFERED, LIKE G.E. GOT OUT OF
BOSTON.
IT'S NOT NECESSARILY BENEFICIAL
FOR US TO BE LURING COMPANIES
AWAY.
RATHER, WE FOCUS ON REALLY
GROWING THE COMPANIES THAT ARE
HERE.
>> Reporter: HAS THERE BEEN ANY
LOCAL PUSHBACK OR BLOWBACK?
I MEAN, I READ A FEW OP-EDS HERE
AND THERE THAT SAID, "OH, YOU
KNOW, G.E. IS A MULTIBILLION-
DOLLAR COMPANY.
THEY DON'T NEED THIS TYPE OF
MONEY PUT BEFORE THEM."
>> THERE ARE CERTAINLY PEOPLE
WHO HAVE SAID THAT THEY DON'T
THINK G.E. SHOULD, YOU KNOW, GET
ANY INCENTIVES, AND I UNDERSTAND
WHERE THEY'RE COMING FROM.
BUT IF YOU TALK TO MOST PEOPLE
WHO PAY ATTENTION TO THIS SORT
OF THING AND STUDY THESE KINDS
OF THINGS, HAVING A COMPANY LIKE
G.E. HERE IN BOSTON AND IN
MASSACHUSETTS IS GOING TO PAY
BACK TEN TIMES OVER IN A WHOLE
VARIETY OF WAYS.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK
CONNECTICUT COULD HAVE DONE MORE
TO PREVENT G.E. FROM LEAVING?
>> IT'S MY VIEW, BASED ON A LOT
OF INTERACTION WITH G.E. AND
WITH THE COMMUNITY IN WHICH THEY
OPERATE AND WITH SOME OF THE
EMPLOYEES, THAT G.E. WAS ON A
ROAD TO MAKE A CHANGE.
I THINK THAT DECISION ACTUALLY
WAS MADE LONG BEFORE WE GOT INTO
CONVERSATION WITH THEM.
BY THE TIME WE GOT A CHANCE TO
TALK TO THEM, I THINK THE DIE
HAD ALREADY BEEN CAST.
>> Reporter: LAST FALL,
CONNECTICUT OFFERED ANOTHER
MAJOR EMPLOYER, SIKORSKY
AIRCRAFT, A $220 MILLION
INCENTIVE PROGRAM TO KEEP IT
FROM RELOCATING.
IN RETURN, SMITH SAYS SIKORSKY
PROMISED TO SPEND $700 MILLION A
YEAR ON CONNECTICUT-BASED
COMPANIES THAT SUPPLY THEIR
PRODUCTION.
BUT THE STATE'S FISCAL WOES
CONTINUE.
THE OFFICE OF FISCAL ANALYSIS IS
PROJECTING A $1.4 BILLION BUDGET
SHORTFALL NEXT FISCAL YEAR.
LAST MONTH, THE STATE ASKED
FAIRFIELD AFTER CUTTING ABOUT $4
MILLION FROM ITS 2016 BUDGET TO
CUT AN ADDITIONAL HALF MILLION.
>> WE HAVE A SIGNIFICANT DROP IN
REVENUE FROM THE STATE THAT WE
HAVE TO MAKE UP BY EITHER TAX
INCREASES OR EXPENSE CUTS.
SO, I KNOW THAT FAIRFIELD WAS
SUCCESSFUL AND VIBRANT AND VERY
MUCH ALIVE BEFORE G.E. CAME
HERE, AND WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
CONTINUE TO GROW AND LEARN TO
GET OVER THAT AND REALIZE
THERE'S LIFE BEYOND G.E.
>> Sreenivasan: SOMALIA, ONE OF
THE SEVEN COUNTRIES LISTED IN
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S EXECUTIVE
ORDER RESTRICTING IMMIGRATION,
SWORE IN A NEW PRESIDENT THIS
WEEK.
MOHAMED ABDULLAHI MOHAMED IS A
DUAL SOMALI AND AMERICAN CITIZEN
WHO WENT TO COLLEGE AND WORKED
IN THE U.S.
NICKNAMED "FARMAJO," THE NEW
PRESIDENT TAKES OVER AS MORE
THAN 250,000 SOMALIS ARE LIVING
IN A REFUGEE CAMP IN NEIGHBORING
KENYA, A CAMP THE KENYAN
GOVERNMENT WANTS TO CLOSE BUT
HAS BEEN PREVENTED FROM DOING SO
BY A COURT DECISION.
FOR MORE, N.P.R. REPORTER EYDER
PERALTA JOINS ME NOW VIA SKYPE
FROM KENYA'S CAPITAL, NAIROBI.
FIRST, LET'S TALK ABOUT THIS
VOTE.
THIS ISN'T EXACTLY THE
ONE-PERSON, ONE-VOTE WE THINK OF
WHEN WE THINK OF AN ELECTION.
WHAT HAPPENED HERE?
>> SO, IT WAS SUPPOSED TO BE A
ONE-PERSON, ONE-VOTE TYPE OF
ELECTION THAT WE'RE USED TO, BUT
THE GOVERNMENT COULD NOT GET ITS
ACT TOGETHER, AND THEY ALSO HAD
MASSIVE SECURITY CONCERNS.
SO, WHAT THEY DECIDED ON WAS A
PROCESS WHERE PARLIAMENT WAS
ELECTING THE PRESIDENT.
SO, PARLIAMENT HAD TWO ROUNDS OF
VOTES, AND BY THE SECOND ROUND,
MOHAMMED FARMAJO WON THAT ROUND.
THEY WERE SUPPOSED TO BE TO A
THIRD ROUND.
BUT THE INCUMBENT STEPPED AWAY
FROM THE RACE.
SO, THEN, MOHAMMED FARMAJO
BECAME THE NEW PRESIDENT OF
SOMALIA.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, THESE CLAN
ELDERS ELECT THE DELEGATES, THE
DELEGATES ELECT THE M.P.s, THE
M.P.s ELECT THE PRESIDENT.
THERE ARE CHARGES OF CORRUPTION
ON WHETHER SOME OF THESE VOTES
WERE BOUGHT.
>> I HAVE BEEN SPEAKING TO LOTS
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE ANTICORRUPTION
ACTIVISTS, AND THEY'VE LOOKED
INTO THIS, AND WHAT THEY SAID
WAS THAT VOTES WERE GOING FOR
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS,
AND THE FORMER PRESIDENT OF
SOMALIA WAS SEEN AS HAVING SPENT
A TON OF MONEY ON THIS SEAT.
AND SO, MOHAMMED FARMAJO, AS DID
ALL 24 CANDIDATES AND THE
INSPECTOR GENERAL FROM THE
COUNTRY HAS LOOKED AT THIS,
WAS... THEY BOUGHT VOTES.
BUT HE WAS SEEN AS THE
LEAST-CORRUPT CANDIDATE.
>> Sreenivasan: LET'S ALSO
TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE
REFUGEE CAMP THAT'S IN KENYA
THAT HAS AN ENORMOUS SOMALI
POPULATION.
YOU WERE JUST THERE.
THIS IS ONE OF THE WORLD'S
LARGEST, IF NOT THE LARGEST
REFUGEE CAMP.
>> YEAH, IT'S HUGE, AND IT WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE CLOSED BY THE
KENYAN GOVERNMENT IN MAY AND A
COURT HERE SAID THAT IT SHOULD
NOT BE CLOSED.
SOMALIS THERE HAD TWO REASONS TO
CELEBRATE, AND, IN FACT, THEY
WENT OUT TO THE STREETS TO
CELEBRATE-- ONE, THAT THE CAMP
WAS NOT CLOSING; TWO, THAT
MOHAMED FARMAJO HAD BEEN
ELECTED.
AND MOHAMED FARMAJO WAS THE
FAVORITE AND PEOPLE HAVE HOPE
THAT HE MIGHT BRING CHANGE TO
SOMALIA.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
EXECUTIVE ORDER AND
REPERCUSSIONS BACK AND FORTH
WHEN SOMALIS WERE PERHAPS ON
THEIR WAY TO THE UNITED STATES
AND THEN STOPPED AND THEN
STARTED AGAIN.
WHAT HAS THAT DONE TO THE
COUNTRY?
>> WHEN I WAS DOWN THERE, PEOPLE
FELT REALLY ABANDONED.
THEY FELT ABANDONED BY THE
UNITED STATES.
KENYANS.
AND ABOUT 200 OF THE REFUGEES
THERE HAD BEEN FLOWN TO NAIROBI,
AWAITING FLIGHTS TO THE UNITED
STATES.
AND THEY WERE CANCELED.
AND I THINK THE IMPORTANT THING
TO REMEMBER IS THAT THESE ARE
REFUGEES WHO HAVE BEEN THERE
SINCE THE '90s AND HAVE BEEN
WAITING FOR RESETTLEMENT TO THE
UNITED STATES ANYWHERE FROM SIX
TO NINE YEARS.
AND SO THIS WAS REALLY
HEARTBREAKING FOR THEM.
BUT THEN THIS DECISION FROM THE
9th CIRCUIT CAME DOWN, AND I
WAS JUST AT THE TRANSIT CENTER
HERE IN NAIROBI A COUPLE OF DAYS
AGO, AND THEY'VE STARTED FLYING
BACK TO THE UNITED STATES AGAIN.
AND THE 200 WHO WERE SENT BACK
TO THE CAMPS TO AWAIT FLIGHTS
HAVE NOW BEEN BROUGHT BACK TO
NAIROBI, AND THEY'VE STARTED
FLYING OUT TODAY, BACK TO THE
UNITED STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
EYDER PERALTA OF N.P.R., JOINING
US VIA SKYPE FROM NAIROBI.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN NEW ZEALAND,
VOLUNTEERS ARE SCRAMBLING TO
SAVE HUNDREDS OF PILOT WHALES.
MORE THAN 650 HAVE BEACHED
THEMSELVES IN THE LAST TWO DAYS
ALONG A THREE-MILE STRETCH OF
COASTLINE.
I.T.N. REPORTER JACQUI LONG HAS
MORE.
>> Reporter: RESCUERS WADE WAIST
DEEP AS THEY ATTEMPT TO REFLOAT
HUNDREDS OF STRANDED PILOT
WHALES THAT CONTINUE TO CRASH
LAND ON THIS REMOTE BEACH IN NEW
ZEALAND.
THEY MANAGED TO REFLOAT AROUND
100 WHALES AT HIGH TIDE THIS
MORNING BEFORE A NEW POD OF OVER
200 BECAME BEACHED, KEEPING
VOLUNTEERS ON WATCH AROUND THE
CLOCK.
AS SOME TRY TO DIG THE ANIMALS
OUT OF TROUBLE, OTHERS KEEP THEM
HYDRATED WITH WET CLOTHS AND
BUCKETS OF WATER TO HELP
REGULATE THEIR CORE TEMPERATURE.
REFLOATING THE ANIMALS IS AN
ARDUOUS TASK.
LIFTING CAN PROVE VERY DIFFICULT
AND DANGEROUS TO THE WHALE'S
WELL-BEING, SO WAITING FOR HIGH-
TIDE IS THE BEST CHANCE OF
GETTING THEM BACK INTO THE SEA.
>> WE HAD A LITTLE BIT OF TIME
WHERE THE WHALES WERE ON DRY
SAND.
BUT VERY QUICKLY, THIS TIDE HAS
COME RACING IN, AND NOW WE'RE
ALL UP TO OUR KNEES-- SOME
PEOPLE UP TO THEIR WAISTS-- IN
WATER.
AND WE'RE STARTING TO MAKE SOME
HEADWAY, AND WE'RE JUST HELPING
ASSIST THE WHALES WITH THEIR
BREATHING UNTIL THE WATER GETS
DEEP ENOUGH SO THEY CAN SWIM.
>> Reporter: IT IS STILL NOT
CLEAR WHY THE WHALES CONTINUE TO
ARRIVE AT FAREWELL SPIT.
SOME SAY THEY MAY BE FLEEING A
HERD OF SHARKS AFTER TEETH MARKS
WERE FOUND ON ONE CARCASS.
NEW ARRIVALS MAY UNFORTUNATELY
BE RESPONDING TO EARLIER
DISTRESS SIGNALS.
MORE THAN 300 OF THE ORIGINAL
400 WHICH ARRIVED HAVE DIED IN
WHAT IS ONE OF NEW ZEALAND'S
MOST DEVASTATING MASS STRANDING
OF WHALES.
WITH NO ANSWERS AS TO WHY IT'S
HAPPENING, MANAGING THE
SITUATION SEEMS TO BE THE ONLY
OPTION.
OFFICIALS MUST ALSO NOW DECIDE
HOW TO CLEAR THE HUNDREDS OF
WHALE CARCASSES STREWN ACROSS
THE SHORE.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY,
FOLLOWING YEARS OF PROTESTS,
YALE UNIVERSITY ANNOUNCED TODAY
IT IS DROPPING THE NAME OF JOHN
CALHOUN FROM ONE OF ITS 12
RESIDENTIAL COLLEGES.
CALHOUN, A YALE ALUM, SENATOR
FROM SOUTH CAROLINA AND U.S.
VICE PRESIDENT, WAS AN ARDENT
SUPPORTER OF SLAVERY WHO
ADVOCATED STATE NULLIFICATION OF
NATIONAL LAWS, A PHILOSOPHY
WHICH LED TO SOUTHERN SECESSION
AND THE CIVIL WAR.
YALE WILL RENAME CALHOUN COLLEGE
AFTER ANOTHER ALUM: PIONEERING
COMPUTER SCIENTIST GRACE MURRAY
HOPPER, WHO POSTHUMOUSLY WON THE
PRESIDENTIAL MEDAL OF FREEDOM
LAST YEAR.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.